PHY118 - Physics

Course Title: Physics
Course No: PHY118
Nature of Course: Theory + Lab
Semester: I
Credit Hours: 3

Full Marks: 60 + 20 + 20
Pass Marks: 24 + 8 + 8

Course Description

This course covers the fundamentals of physics including oscillations, electromagnetic theory, basics of quantum mechanics, band theory, semiconductors, universal logic gates, and the physics of manufacturing integrated circuits.

Course Objectives

The main objective of this course is to provide knowledge in physics and apply this knowledge to computer science and information technology.

Course Contents
Unit 1: Rotational Dynamics and Oscillatory Motion (5 Hrs.)
Moment of Inertia
Torque
Rotational Kinetic Energy
Conservation of Angular Momentum
Oscillation of Spring:
Frequency
Period
Amplitude
Phase Angle
Energy
Unit 2: Electric and Magnetic Field (5 Hrs.)
Electric Field
Electric Potential
Magnetic Field
Force on a Current-Carrying Wire
Magnetic Dipole Moment
Force on a Moving Charge
Hall Effect
Electromagnetic Waves
Unit 3: Fundamentals of Atomic Theory (8 Hrs.)
Blackbody Radiation
Bohr Atom
Spectrum of Hydrogen
Franck-Hertz Experiment
de Broglie Hypothesis and Experimental Verification
Uncertainty Principle and Its Origin
Matter Waves and the Uncertainty Principle
Group Velocity
Unit 4: Methods of Quantum Mechanics (5 Hrs.)
Schrödinger Theory of Quantum Mechanics
Applications of Schrödinger Theory
Outline of the Solution of Schrödinger Equation for Hydrogen Atom
Space Quantization
Spin
Atomic Wave Functions
Unit 5: Fundamentals of Solid State Physics (6 Hrs.)
Crystal Structure
Crystal Bonding
Classical Free Electron Model
Quantum Mechanical Free Electron Model
Bloch Theorem
Kronig-Penney Model
Tight-Binding Approximation
Conductors
Insulators
Semiconductors
Effective Mass
Holes
Unit 6: Semiconductor and Semiconductor Devices (8 Hrs.)
Intrinsic Semiconductors
Extrinsic Semiconductors
Electrical Conductivity of Semiconductors
Photoconductivity
Metal-Metal Junction and Contact Potential
Semiconductor Diode
Bipolar Junction Transistor (BJT)
Field Effect Transistor (FET)
Unit 7: Universal Gates and Physics of Integrated Circuits (8 Hrs.)
Universal Gates
RTL Gates
TTL Gates
Memory Circuits
Clock Circuits
Semiconductor Purification:
Zone Refining
Single Crystal Growth
Processes of IC Production
Electronic Component Fabrication on a Chip
Laboratory Works

Students should be able to perform at least one experiment from:

Unit 1: Rotational Dynamics and Oscillatory Motion
Unit 2: Electric and Magnetic Field
Unit 5: Fundamentals of Solid State Physics
Unit 6: Semiconductor and Semiconductor Devices
Unit 7: Universal Gates and Physics of Integrated Circuits

The details of the experiments will be provided in the laboratory manual.

Text Book
Garcia Narciso and Arthur Damask, Physics for Computer Science Students, Springer-Verlag.
Reference Books
David Halliday, Robert Resnick, and Jearl Walker, Fundamentals of Physics, 9th Edition, John Wiley & Sons.
Francis W. Sears, Hugh D. Young, Roger Freedman, and Mark Zemansky, University Physics, Volumes 1 & 2, 14th Edition, Pearson.
Randall D. Knight, Physics for Scientists and Engineers: A Strategic Approach, 3rd Edition, Pearson.
